Add testing guide - introduction / overview (#1469)
facebook/react-native-website: docs/testing.md

## Static Analysis

The first step to improve your code quality is to start using static analysis tools. Static analysis checks your code for errors as you write it, but without running any of that code.

- **Linters** analyze code to catch common errors, such as unused code, help avoid pitfalls or flag style guide no-nos like using tabs instead of spaces (or vice versa, depending on your configuration). Linters are configured by a set of rules - and your code needs to follow them.
- **Type checking** ensures that the construct you’re passing to a function matches what the function was designed to accept, preventing passing a string to a counting function that expects an integer, for instance.

React Native comes with two such tools configured out of the box: [ESLint](https://eslint.org/) for linting and [Flow](https://flow.org/en/docs/) for type checking. You can also use [TypeScript](https://www.typescriptlang.org/), which is a typed language that compiles to plain JavaScript.

## Writing Testable Code

> To start with tests, you first need to write code that is testable. Consider a car’s engine. For some reason it won’t start. In older cars, figuring out what is wrong with the engine requires the mechanic to take the engine apart, piece by piece, until they can figure out the issue. In modern cars, engines are outfitted with sensors that keep an eye on parts of the system, determining the exact location of part failures—sometimes before the engine even breaks down! Sensors changed the way engines were designed and manufactured.

Reviewer: I wrote this bit ;p Often times looping in a technology folks already know and are familiar with to paint a picture makes the information more sticky.

> To start with tests, you first need to write code that is testable. Consider a car’s engine. For some reason it won’t start. In older cars, figuring out what is wrong with the engine requires the mechanic to take the engine apart, piece by piece, until they can figure out the issue. In modern cars, engines are outfitted with sensors that keep an eye on parts of the system, determining the exact location of part failures—sometimes before the engine even breaks down! Sensors changed the way engines were designed and manufactured.

Reviewer 2: I like that we're using a metaphor to explain tests!

I think there's a difference between the way sensors in cars work and the way code tests work because sensors do not run parts of the engine like tests do. Sensors are more like static analysis in the above section. Is there a better metaphor for this section we could use?

> To start with tests, you first need to write code that is testable. Consider a car’s engine. For some reason it won’t start. In older cars, figuring out what is wrong with the engine requires the mechanic to take the engine apart, piece by piece, until they can figure out the issue. In modern cars, engines are outfitted with sensors that keep an eye on parts of the system, determining the exact location of part failures—sometimes before the engine even breaks down! Sensors changed the way engines were designed and manufactured.

Author: How would this sound?

To start with tests, you first need to write code that is testable. Consider an aircraft manufacturing process - before a model first takes off, individual parts are tested to guarantee they are safe and function correctly. For example, the durability of wings is tested by bending them under extreme load, engine parts are tested for their durability, windshield is tested against simulated bird impact, and much more.

> To start with tests, you first need to write code that is testable. Consider a car’s engine. For some reason it won’t start. In older cars, figuring out what is wrong with the engine requires the mechanic to take the engine apart, piece by piece, until they can figure out the issue. In modern cars, engines are outfitted with sensors that keep an eye on parts of the system, determining the exact location of part failures—sometimes before the engine even breaks down! Sensors changed the way engines were designed and manufactured.

Reviewer: I endorse this new metaphor! Airplanes are pretty cool, too!

> To start with tests, you first need to write code that is testable. Consider a car’s engine. For some reason it won’t start. In older cars, figuring out what is wrong with the engine requires the mechanic to take the engine apart, piece by piece, until they can figure out the issue. In modern cars, engines are outfitted with sensors that keep an eye on parts of the system, determining the exact location of part failures—sometimes before the engine even breaks down! Sensors changed the way engines were designed and manufactured.

Author: ok, I'm considering this resolved then

Similarly, with software, writing your code in many small functions that you can test (like adding sensors to the different components of an engine) is more effective than writing your entire program in one file with many lines of code (where you can only test if the engine starts or not). In this way, writing testable code is intertwined with writing clean, modular code. We encourage you to explore this topic in other learning resources.

> To help make your app more testable, it’s a good idea to separate the view part of your app, React components, from business logic and app state (regardless of whether you use Redux, MobX or other solutions). This way, you can separate tests of your business logic — which shouldn’t rely on your React components — from the components themselves, whose job is primarily rendering your app’s UI!

Reviewer 3: Is there another post online somewhere that we like that we can link to for how to write testable React / JS code?

Author: I did some googling, but didn't find too much content. Would you like to add some of these?

https://www.toptal.com/javascript/writing-testable-code-in-javascript  
https://testing.googleblog.com/2008/08/by-miko-hevery-so-you-decided-to.html?m=1 
https://www.toptal.com/qa/how-to-write-testable-code-and-why-it-matters 
https://dzone.com/articles/write-testable-code

Reviewer: I endorse you writing your own post... with us :3

Theoretically, you could go so far as to move all logic and data fetching out of your components. This way your components would be solely dedicated to rendering, and your state would be independent on your components - your app’s logic would work without any React components at all!

After writing testable code, it’s time to write some actual tests! (Or if you do test-driven development, you actually write tests first!).

React Native apps come with [Jest](https://jestjs.io) out of the box, ready to use. Jest is a popular JavaScript Testing Framework also started at Facebook. You can use it to write all types of tests featured in this guide. Let’s get started!

### Structuring Tests

> Your tests should be short and ideally test only one thing. Let's start with an example unit test:

Reviewer 3: Should this say something like "start with an example unit test written with Jest"?

Author: did that

```js
it('given a date in the past, colorForDueDate() returns red', () => {
    expect(colorForDueDate('2000-10-20'))).toBe('red');
});
```

> The test is described by the string passed to the [`it`](https://jestjs.io/docs/en/api#testname-fn-timeout) function - take a good care writing the description so that it’s clear what is being tested. Do your best to cover the following:

Reviewer 3: s/take a good care/take good care/

Author: fixed

If your test has many steps or many expectations, you probably want to split it into multiple smaller ones. Also, ensure that your tests are completely independent of one another. Each test in your suite must be executable on its own without eg. first running some other test. Conversely, if you run all your tests together, the first test must not influence the output of the second one.

Lastly, as developers we like when our code works great and doesn't crash. With tests, this is often the opposite - think of a failing test as of a _good thing_! When a test is failing, it means something is not right and it gives us an opportunity to fix the problem before it impacts the users.

## Unit tests

> The lowest level at which you can test is unit testing. Unit tests cover the smallest parts of code, like individual functions or classes.

Reviewer 3: Is "The lowest level at which you can test is unit testing" a phrase that will make sense? Is this sentence necessary or is the following sentence enough?

Author: I think just the second sentence is enough, I removed the first.

## Integration Tests

When writing larger software systems, individual pieces of it need to interact with each other. As explained, in unit testing, when your unit depends on another one, you’ll sometimes end up mocking the dependency, replacing it with a fake one.

In integration testing, real individual units are combined (same as in your app) and tested together to ensure that their cooperation works as expected. This is not to say that mocking does not happen here: you’ll still need mocks (for example to mock communication with the weather service covered in the mocking paragraph), but much less than in unit testing.

> Please note that the terminology around what integration testing means is not always consistent. Also, the line between what is a unit test and what is an integration test may not always be clear. As a rule of thumb for this document, when your test
>
> - Uses an external system (such as the thermometer in the mocking paragraph)
> - Does a network call to other application
> - Does any kind of file or database I/O
>
> Then it falls into the “integration test” category.

> ## Component Tests

Reviewer 3: Is this supposed to be a sub point of Integration Tests? It is at the same heading level

Author: I'm myself not sure. I think component tests can fall below unit tests as well as integration tests, so I covered it separately, also because it's a little different (requires extra deps) from testing vanilla js.

Author: I addressed this by saying "Component tests could fall into both unit and integration testing, and since they are such a core part of React Native, we'll cover them in separate paragraphs."

- [`@testing-library/react-native`](https://www.native-testing-library.com/) is another alternative that also builds on top of React’s test renderer and adds `fireEvent` and `query` apis described in the next paragraph.

> Note that component tests are only JavaScript tests running on Node, they do _not_ take into account any iOS or Android code which is backing the React Native components. It follows that they cannot give you a 100% confidence that everything works for the user - if there is a bug in the iOS or Android code, they will not find it.

### Testing user interactions

Aside from rendering some UI, your components handle events like `onChangeText` for `TextInput` or `onPress` for `Button`. They may also contain other functions and event callbacks. Consider the following example:

```js
class GroceryShoppingListCreator extends React.Component {
  render() {
    <TextInput testID="groceryTextInput" onChangeText={this.setGroceryItem} />;
    <Button
      label="Add the item to list"
      onPress={this.addNewItemToShoopingList}
    />;
  }

  addNewItemToShoppingList = (someGroceryItem: string) => {
    // ...
  };
}
```

> When testing user interactions, test the component from the user perspective: you could write your tests to call `addNewItemToShoppingList` directly, and while such test works, it’s very close to the implementation details of your component.

Reviewer 3: s/it’s very close to the implementation details of your component/it would break if you refactor the implementation details of your component/

Author: I reworded that to 

> and while such test works, it's very close to the implementation details of your component and would break if you refactor the component.

hope that works

Now that we know how to fire an event, let's take a look at verifying that it caused the expected change in your component: for example, that a certain text is rendered in a `GroceryShoppingList`. Aforementioned component testing libraries expose `query` apis for this purpose. An example may look like this:

```js
import {render} from 'react-native-testing-library';

const {getByText} = render(<GroceryShoppingList />); // render shopping list
const bananaElement = getByText('banana');
expect(bananaElement).toBeDefined(); // expect 'banana' to be on the list
```

### Testing rendered output

[Snapshot testing](https://jestjs.io/docs/en/snapshot-testing) lets you test how—and if—a component is rendering. A snapshot is a textual representation of your component’s output that gets committed in your repo. When using snapshot testing, you first implement your component and then run the snapshot test, which saves the snapshot to a file. Any future changes to the component will result in a change in the snapshot that needs to be checked as part of your code review.

> In theory, you can use snapshots to test anything that is serializable, but do not overuse them! Snapshot is created _after_ you’re done working on the component, and at that point the snapshot is considered to be correct (even in the case when the rendered output is actually wrong). You need to make sure that the snapshot contains what you expect (which may not be trivial because snapshots can be fairly large). Snapshots do not ensure that your component render logic is correct, they are merely good at guarding against unexpected changes and for checking that the components in the React tree under test receive the expected props (styles and etc.).

Reviewer 3: Typo at "Snapshot is created" Does it need a "The"?

Author: Sorry, I'm not sure what "The" you're referring to, but I have checked " Allow edits from maintainers." so maybe you can edit it right here in the PR.

Author: note that I expanded the snapshot testing paragraph in https://github.com/facebook/react-native-website/pull/1469/commits/127218a09cec6f58bcd4039825e567982eae64f0

Reviewer: @vonovak We are using hooks and function components in the docs exclusively going forward. If you can do this, I can merge!

Author: snapshot part was rewritten with help of thymikee and class component is gone (example uses hooks) so resolving.

Similarly, with software, as opposed to writing your entire program in one huge file with many lines of code, writing your code in multiple small modules that you can test is more effective. In this way, writing testable code is intertwined with writing clean, modular code.

To help make your app more testable, it’s a good idea to separate the view part of your app, React components, from business logic and app state (regardless of whether you use Redux, MobX or other solutions). This way, you can separate tests of your business logic — which shouldn’t rely on your React components — from the components themselves, whose job is primarily rendering your app’s UI!

Theoretically, you could go so far as to move all logic and data fetching out of your components. This way your components would be solely dedicated to rendering, and your state would be independent on your components - your app’s logic would work without any React components at all!

After writing testable code, it’s time to write some actual tests! (Or if you do test-driven development, you actually write tests first!). We encourage you to explore the topic of testability in other learning resources.

> React Native apps come with [Jest](https://jestjs.io) out of the box, ready to use. Jest is a popular JavaScript Testing Framework also started at Facebook. You can use it to write all types of tests featured in this guide. Let’s get started!

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The default template of React Native ships with [Jest](https://jestjs.io) testing framework. It includes a preset that's tailored to this environment so you can get productive without tweaking the configuration and mocks straight away. You can use Jest to write all types of tests featured in this guide. Let’s get started!
```

- [`react-native-testing-library`](https://github.com/callstack/react-native-testing-library) builds on top of React’s test renderer and adds `fireEvent` and `query` apis described in the next paragraph.
- [`@testing-library/react-native`](https://www.native-testing-library.com/) is another alternative that also builds on top of React’s test renderer and adds `fireEvent` and `query` apis described in the next paragraph.

> Note that component tests are only JavaScript tests running on Node, they do _not_ take into account any iOS or Android code which is backing the React Native components. It follows that they cannot give you a 100% confidence that everything works for the user - if there is a bug in the iOS or Android code, they will not find it.

### Testing User Interactions

Aside from rendering some UI, your components handle events like `onChangeText` for `TextInput` or `onPress` for `Button`. They may also contain other functions and event callbacks. Consider the following example:

```js

> class GroceryShoppingListCreator extends React.Component {

Author: I'll see what I can do, I want this

> you could write your tests to call `addNewItemToShoppingList` directly, and while such test works, it's very close to the implementation details of your component and would break if you refactor the component.

to make sense and if I add hooks, things will become a little less straightforward imho

> class GroceryShoppingListCreator extends React.Component {

Reviewer: @vonovak We are using hooks and function components in the docs exclusively going forward. If you can do this, I can merge!

> class GroceryShoppingListCreator extends React.Component {

Reviewer: I know it will be a little less obvious, but it is/will be the more widespread usecase, meaning investing in conveying this right with hooks will pay off more than sticking with the easier explanation in classes.

> class GroceryShoppingListCreator extends React.Component {

Author: @rachelnabors I rewrote the example with hooks, and I think it's for the better.

  render() {
    return (
      <>
        <TextInput
          placeholder="Enter grocery item"

>           onChangeText={this.setGroceryItem}

Author: example is now valid code

        />
        <Button
          title="Add the item to list"
          onPress={this.props.addNewItemToShoppingList}
        />
      </>
    );
  }
}
```

> When testing user interactions, test the component from the user perspective: you could write your tests to call `addNewItemToShoppingList` directly, and while such test works, it's very close to the implementation details of your component and would break if you refactor the component.

Author: I actually think that the original has a slightly better "flow" but I'm not a native speaker. @rachelnabors what do you think? Thank you.

> When testing user interactions, test the component from the user perspective: you could write your tests to call `addNewItemToShoppingList` directly, and while such test works, it's very close to the implementation details of your component and would break if you refactor the component.

Reviewer 4: I'm only following learnings from http://www.hemingwayapp.com/ which suggests to increase readability by constructing less complex sentences

> When testing user interactions, test the component from the user perspective: you could write your tests to call `addNewItemToShoppingList` directly, and while such test works, it's very close to the implementation details of your component and would break if you refactor the component.

Reviewer: Ha, and interestingly enough, complex sentences are harder for translation services and non-native English speakers to muddle through. I think it's better as @vonovak originally wrote it!

Note that if you create the snapshot _after_ you’re done working on the component, at that point the snapshot is considered to be correct (even in the case when the rendered output is actually wrong). You as a developer or reviewer need to make sure that the snapshot contains what you expect. That may not be trivial because snapshots can be fairly large.

In order to make snapshot comparison easier for a given component, you can start taking the snapshot _early_. That is, instead of creating the snapshot after you're done working, create one at the start and update it continuously as you bring the component code to the desired state.

In theory, you can use snapshots to test anything that is serializable, but do not overuse them! Snapshots themselves do not ensure that your component render logic is correct, they are merely good at guarding against unexpected changes and for checking that the components in the React tree under test receive the expected props (styles and etc.). When in doubt, prefer explicit expectations as described in the previous paragraph.

## End to End Tests

> In End-to-end (E2E) tests, you verify your app is working on a device from the user perspective.

Author: @thymikee I find the word "environment" to be too ambiguous, I'll write real device or simulator if you don't mind.

> In End-to-end (E2E) tests, you verify your app is working on a device from the user perspective.

Reviewer 4: Sure, appreciated!

To run them, you build your app in the release configuration and run tests against it in an emulator or a physical device. In E2E tests, you no longer think about React components, React Native apis, Redux stores or any business logic - that is not the purpose of E2E tests and those are not even accessible to you during E2E testing.

Instead, E2E testing libraries allow you to find and control elements in the screen of your app: for example, you can tap buttons or insert text into textinputs the same way a real user would. Then you can make assertions about whether or not certain element exists in the app’s screen, whether or not it’s visible, what text it contains and so on.

> E2E tests give you the highest possible confidence that part of your app is working but the tradeoff is that writing and running them is _much_ more time consuming than with the previously mentioned types of tests. E2E tests also are more demanding when it comes to their maintenance.

Author: thanks, I'll rephrase slightly because I want to state that writing them is also harder compared to the other test types

A good way to start is covering only the most important parts of your app by a small number of E2E tests which will ensure those parts keep working.

There are several E2E testing tools available: in the React Native community, [Detox](https://github.com/wix/detox/) is a popular framework because it’s tailored for React Native apps. Another popular library in the space of iOS and Android apps is [Appium](http://appium.io/).

## Summary

> Testing is important because it proves that your code is working, and perhaps even more importantly, ensures that your code continues to work in the future as you add new features, refactor the existing ones, or after you upgrade major dependencies of your project.

Author: used the suggestion so resolving

There is more value in testing, that perhaps isn't immediately visible: when there is a bug in your code, often the easiest way to fix it is to write a failing test that exposes the bug - then when you fix the bug in your code and re-run the test, it'll pass, meaning the bug is fixed and is never reintroduced into the code base.

> Tests can also serve as documentation for new people joining your team - when they have to use code they have never seen before, reading tests can greatly help them to understand how the existing code is intended to be used.

Author: I moved this into separate "motivation paragraph"

```js
test('updates grocery input', () => {
  fireEvent.changeText(getByPlaceholder('Enter grocery item'), 'banana');
});
```

The first parameter is a query function that returns a `ReactTestInstance` and the second parameter is the new text that user entered.

This way, we're not testing what some function is doing - we're testing what happens when a user changes the text in the `TextInput`!

Now that we know how to fire an event, let's take a look at verifying that it caused the expected change in your component: for example, that a certain text is rendered in a `GroceryShoppingList`. Aforementioned component testing libraries expose `query` apis for this purpose. An example may look like this:

```js
test('given empty GroceryShoppingList, user can add an item to it', () => {
  const {getByTestId, getByText, getAllByText} = render(
    <GroceryShoppingList />,
  );

  fireEvent.changeText(getByPlaceholder('Enter grocery item'), 'banana');
  fireEvent.press(getByText('Add the item to list'));
  const bananaElements = getAllByText('banana');
  expect(bananaElements).toHaveLength(1); // expect 'banana' to be on the list
});
```

### Testing Rendered Output

> [Snapshot testing](https://jestjs.io/docs/en/snapshot-testing) lets you verify how component is rendering. A snapshot is a textual representation of your component’s render output, and may look like this:

Reviewer 4: What do you think about this phrasing?
```suggestion
[Snapshot testing](https://jestjs.io/docs/en/snapshot-testing) is a special kind of testing enabled by Jest. It is a very powerful and low-level tool, so special attention is advised when using it. 

> In this guide we will speak about "component snapshot", which is a snapshot specialized to render React component tree objects using a JSX-like string, powered by a [custom React serializer](https://jestjs.io/docs/en/configuration#snapshotserializers-arraystring) that lets Jest translate JS objects to string that's human-readable. It's built into Jest and used by default so you don't need to worry about it.

A component snapshot is a textual representation of your component’s render output _generated_ during a test run, and may look like this:
```

Author: @thymikee I took the suggestion but not sure about it upon re-reading it: If I simplify what's written there, it sounds like "component snapshot is a snapshot specialized to render React components using a string",  which sounds a little odd.

here's the text for reference:

> In this guide we will speak about "component snapshot", which is a snapshot specialized to render React component tree objects using a JSX-like string, powered by a custom React serializer that lets Jest translate JS objects to string that's human-readable. 

How about this?

In this guide we will speak about "component snapshot", which is a JSX-like string, created by a custom React serializer that lets Jest translate React component trees to string that's human-readable.

Reviewer 4: Sounds good 👍

```
<Text
  style={
    Object {
      "fontSize": 20,
      "textAlign": "center",
    }
  }>
  Welcome to React Native!
</Text>
```

> Snapshots are _generated_ by a component testing testing library, unlike the other types of tests which are written manually (snapshots are too complex to be created by hand).

Reviewer 4: Let's remove this paragraph

Reviewer 4: If you don't want to remove it, please at least remove the `testing testing` duplication, I forgot to mention earlier 😅

Author: @thymikee I did remove it in https://github.com/facebook/react-native-website/pull/1469/commits/4a04c6877333907f9e699af53915a68c0c6bc105

> With snapshot testing, you typically first implement your component and then run the snapshot test, which creates a snapshot and saves it to a file in your repo as a reference snapshot. The file is then committed and checked during code review. Changes to the component render output will result in change of its snapshot, which fails the test. You then need to update the stored reference snapshot for the test to pass. That change again needs to be commited and reviewed.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
With snapshot testing, you typically first implement your component and then run the snapshot test, which creates a snapshot and saves it to a file in your repo as a reference snapshot. **The file is then committed and checked during code review**. Changes to the component render output will result in change of its snapshot, which fails the test. You then need to update the stored reference snapshot for the test to pass. That change again needs to be committed and reviewed.
```
